\documentclass[bg]{copernicus}

\begin{document}

\title{Concentrations and fluxes of dissolved organic carbon \newline in runoff from
a forested catchment: insights from high \newline frequency measurements}

\author[1]{S.~Strohmeier}
\author[2]{K.-H.~Knorr}
\author[1,2]{M.~Reichert}
\author[2]{S.~Frei}
\author[3]{J.~H.~Fleckenstein}
\author[2]{S.~Peiffer}
\author[1]{E.~Matzner}

\affil[1]{Department of Soil Ecology, Bayreuth Center of Ecology and
Environmental Research (BayCEER), University of Bayreuth, 95440 Bayreuth,
Germany}
\affil[2]{Department of Hydrology, Bayreuth Center of Ecology and Environmental
Research (BayCEER), University of Bayreuth, 95440
Bayreuth, Germany}
\affil[3]{Department of Hydrogeology, Helmholtz Center for Environmental
Research (UFZ), 04318 Leipzig, Germany}

\correspondence{E.~Matzner (egbert.matzner@uni-bayreuth.de)}

\runningtitle{Dissolved organic carbon in runoff from a forested catchment}
\runningauthor{S.~Strohmeier et al.}

\received{14 August 2012}
\pubdiscuss{31 August 2012}
\revised{11 January 2013}
\accepted{16 January 2013}

\published{}

\firstpage{1}

\maketitle


\begin{abstract}
Concentrations of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) in runoff from catchments
are often subject to substantial short-term variations. The aim of this
study was to identify the compartmental sources of DOC in a forested
catchment and the causes for short-term variations in runoff. Furthermore,
we investigated the implication of short-term variations for the calculation
of annual runoff fluxes. High frequency measurements (30\,min intervals)
of DOC in runoff, of discharge and groundwater table were conducted for one
year in the 4.2\,km$^{2}$ forested Lehstenbach catchment, Germany. Riparian
wetland soils represent about 30\,{\%} of the catchment area. The quality of
DOC was investigated by three dimensional fluorescence excitation-emission
matrices in samples taken from runoff, deep groundwater and shallow
groundwater from the riparian wetland soils. The concentrations of DOC in
runoff were highly variable at an hourly to daily time scale, ranging from
2.6\,mg\,L$^{-1}$ to 34\,mg\,L$^{-1}$ with an annual average of 9.2\,mg\,L$^{-1}$.
The concentrations were positively related to discharge, with a counter
clockwise hysteresis. Relations of DOC to discharge were steeper and the
degree of hysteresis larger in the summer/fall than in the winter/spring
period. Dynamics of groundwater table, discharge, DOC concentrations and DOC
quality parameters indicated that DOC in runoff originated mainly from the
riparian wetland soils, both under low and high flow conditions. The annual
export of DOC from the catchment was 84\,kg\,C\,ha$^{-1}$\,yr$^{-1}$ when
calculated from the high frequency measurements. If the annual export was
calculated by simulated samplings of $>$2\,days intervals
substantial deviations resulted.

Predicted changes in precipitation and discharge patterns as well as
generally increasing temperatures likely will cause raising DOC exports from
this catchment.
\end{abstract}

\introduction

The importance of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) for the functioning of
terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems is widely known. DOC plays an important
role in the C cycle, in the acid-base chemistry of soils and surface waters,
it influences nutrient cycling, and affects the mobility and availability of
metals and contaminants (Bolan et al., 2011; Kalbitz et al., 2000). Although
numerous studies on DOC in soils and catchments have been published in the
last decade, sources and sinks of DOC in soils and the transition of DOC
from terrestrial to the aquatic ecosystems are still poorly understood in
their quantitative response to driving factors, like climatic conditions,
flow paths, vegetation and soil conditions.

DOC in runoff from forested catchments originates mostly from soil organic
matter (Degens et al., 1991). Depending on precipitation, flow paths and
catchment characteristics, different soil types and soil horizons from
different parts of the catchment may feed the runoff with DOC, resulting in
\mbox{temporal} variations of DOC quality and quantity in runoff. In general,
the DOC export from forested catchments in Scandinavia was found to be
positively related to the area of wetland soils (Laudon et al., 2011). To
identify the compartmental sources of DOC in runoff, quality parameters of
DOC can be used, like fluorescence spectroscopy (Ishii and Boyer, 2012;
Fellman et al., 2009; Austnes et al., 2010). This is a highly sensitive
method to determine changes in DOC quality and can be applied to a large
number of samples.

DOC concentrations in runoff from forested catchments are often subjected to
temporal variations of one order of magnitude at time scales ranging from
hours to seasons. This can be attributed to the large differences in DOC
concentrations in the two dominant flow components contributing to
individual discharge events, i.e. groundwater versus shallow groundwater and
surface runoff from riparian wetland soils (McGlynn and McDonnell, 2003;
Hood et al., 2006). Ludwig et al.~(1996) related the DOC fluxes to drainage
intensity, basin slope, and the amount of carbon stored in soils.
Interestingly, they found a negative relationship between basin slope and
DOC concentrations as steeper slopes may cause a restricted contact between
soil and water, and thus lead to lower DOC concentrations in runoff.

Hysteretic relationships between discharge and solute concentrations have
observed, among others, by Hornberger et al.~(1994), Evans and Davies (1998),
Butturini et al.~(2006), Raymond and Saiers (2010), Pellerin et al.~(2012)
and Jeong et al.~(2012). Evans and Davies (1998) proposed the hysteretic
concentration/discharge relationship for the analysis of episode
hydrochemistry. Using a three component model, they categorized the
concentration/discharge relationships into clockwise and counterclockwise
hysteresis with a positive, negative or no trend. This categorization allows
for the distinction of flow components that are drained during the rising or
falling limbs of the hydrograph. Generally, high concentrations during the
rising limb of the hydrograph lead to clockwise hysteresis, while high
concentrations during the falling limb imply counterclockwise hysteresis.
Clockwise hysteretic patterns have been attributed to early flushing and
depletion effects as well as changes in the connectivity of riparian or
hillslope flowpaths (Hornberger et al., 1994; Boyer et al., 2000; {\AA}gren
et al., 2008; Pacific et al., 2010; McGlynn and McDonnell, 2003).

Only recently, field-deployable automated devices became available to analyze
physico-chemical parameters of runoff in high temporal resolution. From such
measurements, new insights in the hydrological, chemical and biological
controls of runoff chemistry might emerge (Kirchner et al., 2004; Halliday et
al., 2012). Using high frequency measurements of DOC quality parameters,
Spencer et al.~(2007) found diurnal patterns which would not have been
revealed by discrete sampling strategies, whereas Jeong et al.~(2012), for a
catchment in monsoonal climate, showed up to 23\,{\%} of the annual exports
of DOC and 48\,{\%} of POC being realized in only a few discrete events.

The DOC export fluxes with runoff might represent a substantial contribution
to the net C budget of ecosystems (Kindler et al., 2011). If the DOC
concentration varies with discharge, the flux calculation is subjected to
potential errors since discharge is often recorded permanently, while DOC
concentrations are measured infrequently in larger time intervals (like
fortnightly) with interpolation procedures needed for the calculation of
annual fluxes (Hinton et al., 1997). Koehler et al.~(2009) reported the
annual DOC flux with runoff calculated from 30 min measurements to be similar
to infrequent samplings once a day, once a week and once a month. In case of
mineral elements (sulfate, nitrate, chloride), that typically show more of a
chemostatic behavior, fortnightly sampling of runoff was adequate to capture
annual fluxes (Alewell et al., 2004).

The objectives of this study were thus (1) to quantify the effect of
hydrological conditions on DOC variations in runoff from a forested
watershed, (2) to identify the compartmental origin of DOC in runoff, and
(3) to investigate the implications of the short-term variations for the
calculation of DOC export fluxes at the annual scale.

To these ends we have studied the relationship between DOC, discharge and
groundwater level in a forested headwater catchment based on high temporal
resolution techniques.

\section{Material and methods}

\subsection{Study site}

The Lehstenbach catchment is located in the Fichtelgebirge region
(50$^\circ$8$'$35$''$\,N, 11$^\circ$52$'$8$''$\,E) in southeastern Germany
(Frei et al., 2010). The catchment area is 4.2\,km$^{2}$ with elevations
ranging from 695 to 877\,m above sea level. Mean annual precipitation is
1150\,mm (1971--2000). The annual temperature averages at 5.3\,$^\circ$C
(1971--2000). During winter a substantial snow cover develops regularly.

The bedrock is variscan granite. Most abundant soil types are Dystric
Cambisols, Haplic Podsols and Histosols (IUSS, 2007). About one third of the
catchment area is covered by Histosols, mostly by minerotrophic fens with
some bogs in between (in the following referred to as riparian wetland
soils). The riparian wetland soils have been drained by ditches established
probably in the 19th century and some active ditches still exist.

Norway spruce (\textit{Picea abies }(L.) KARST.) covers approx. 90\,{\%} of
the catchment area. The riparian wetland soils are covered partly by Norway
spruce, but also by \textit{Sphagnum} mosses with patches of
\textit{Vaccinium myrtillus}, \textit{Juncus effusus}, \textit{Carex nigra},
\textit{Carex rostrata}, \textit{Carex canescens}, \textit{Molinia caerulea},
and \textit{Eriophorum vaginatum} (Matzner, 2004).

\newpage
\subsection{Hydrological boundary conditions and water\\ sampling}

In the upland areas of the catchment the mean groundwater depth is more than
10\,m. Inclination of the catchment averages at 3$^\circ$ and surface runoff
at the slopes is of minor importance (Lischeid et al., 2002). However, based
on a modeling approach, Frei et al.~(2010) suggested some surface runoff from
the riparian wetland soils.

Precipitation was continuously recorded in the upper part of the catchment by
a tipping bucket rain gauge. The shallow groundwater level was measured in
the riparian wetland soils about 2\,m away from the stream using a piezometer
with an immersed pressure sensor (Solinst Canada Ltd., Georgetown, Ontario,
Canada). Discharge of the Lehstenbach stream was measured in 30\,min
intervals using a pressure sensor (Solinst Canada Ltd., Georgetown, Ontario,
Canada) immersed at a V shaped weir at the catchment outlet.

Samples from shallow groundwater and soil solution in the riparian wetland
soils, from deep (oxic) groundwater (4 wells, depth 3--15\,m), and from
upstream runoff without riparian wetlands, were taken on 4 occasions in 2011
(27 April, 18 May, 2 June, 16 June). The sampling of shallow groundwater and
soil solution at these dates reflected different groundwater levels (Fig.~1).
Shallow groundwater from the riparian wetland soils was sampled from a
piezometer, deep groundwater was sampled from a well located in the upland
forest area using an electric pump (Eijkelkamp, Giesbeek, the Netherlands),
and soil solution from the riparian wetland soils was taken by suction
devices (MacroRhizon, UMS GmbH, Muenchen, Germany).

DOC concentrations in the potential source compartments were largest in soil
solution and shallow groundwater of the riparian wetland soils and in the Oa
horizon percolates of the forest floor (Table~1). Lowest concentrations were
observed in the soil solutions from deep layers of the upland forest soils
and in the deep groundwater.

For time resolved sampling of runoff, we used an ISCO bottle sampler (ISCO
6712, Teledyne Isco, Inc., Lincoln, Nebraska, USA) programmed in a 2\,h time
interval. We chose samples according to DOC concentration and discharge
measurements, trying to represent the rising limb of the hydrograph, DOC
concentration peak and the falling limb with 5--10 samples per event. Samples
were stored in 100\,mL PE bottles at 2\,$^\circ$C until analysis. In total,
116 runoff samples were analyzed for DOC quality (26 on the same dates as
groundwater samples, 90 on other occasions).

Baseflow separations were conducted using either the tool WHAT (Web-based
Hydrograph Analysis Tool, \url{https://engineering.purdue.edu/\~what/}) or
the algorithms by Chapman (1999, equation 8 and 9). The percentage of
baseflow, and thus the flux of DOC during baseflow conditions, was strongly
dependent on the choice of parameters. Therefore, we defined low flow
conditions as discharge events below the median discharge (60\,L\,s$^{-1})$.

\newpage
\subsection{Measurements of DOC concentrations in runoff in\\ high temporal
resolution}

DOC concentrations in runoff were measured in 30\,min intervals from the 6 of
August 2010 to the 5 of August 2011 by a spectrometric device
(spectro::lyser, s::can Messtechnik GmbH, Vienna, Austria) which was
permanently immersed at the weir at the catchment outlet. A UV-VIS spectrum
with a range from 200 to 732\,nm was recorded every 2.5\,nm. DOC
concentrations were calculated by the spectro::lyser software based on the
inclusion of about 80 wavelengths under correction for turbidity. The
spectro::lyser device was calibrated by measured DOC concentrations in runoff
from the Lehstenbach. Hence, we used a customized calibration instead of a
general setting. Although the spectro::lyzer could potentially also measure
nitrate from absorption in the UV-range, we found that this is not possible
in the presence of high and variable concentrations of DOC.

For quality control, the DOC concentrations estimated by the spectro::lyser
were regularly cross-checked with DOC measurements by thermo-catalytic
oxidation (TOC-VCPN-Analyzer, Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). Cross-checks were made
in August, September, and November 2010 and in March, April and June 2011.
The $R^{2}$ of the linear correlation between the two methods ranged from
0.95 and 0.98 and the slope of the regression was close to 1 (data not
shown). As there was no drift of the DOC concentration due to environmental
conditions, we decided against installing an automated cleansing system. The
measuring cell was manually cleaned fortnightly.

Due to instrumental failure, no measurements of DOC concentrations were
available from 25 of August 2010 to 2 of September 2010, from 8 to 23 of
December 2010, and from 13 to 14 of January 2011. The missing concentration
data (7\,{\%} of all measurements) were interpolated by means of an
artificial neural network (software SPSS 19, Modeler 14.1, IBM, Armonk, New
York, United States) using the high resolution measurements (30\,min)
aggregated to daily means. A multilayer perceptron model with a feed-forward
algorithm, one hidden layer and five neurons was used to model the daily DOC
concentration. The model was trained with a back propagation algorithm using
70\,{\%} of the data. Validation of the model was done with the remaining
30\,{\%} of the data. This resulted in a model efficiency of $R^{2}=0.89$ and
a RMSE of 1.63\,mg\,L$^{-1}$. The best prediction for the daily average DOC
concentrations was achieved with four input parameters on the order of (1)
the precipitation sum of the 6\,days before the gauging, (2) mean discharge
on the day of measurement, (3) mean temperature of the 170\,days before the
measurement and (4) the precipitation on the day of measurement.

%t01
\begin{table}[t]
\caption{Range of DOC concentrations in different compartments of the
Lehstenbach catchment.}\scalebox{0.9}[0.9]{
\begin{tabular}{lll}
\tophline
Compartment&Range &Reference \\
&(mg\,L$^{-1}$)&\\
\middlehline
Soil solution beneath Oa horizon & 30--80&Schulze et al.~(2011) \\
(upland forest soil)&&\\
Soil solution in 90\,cm depth &3--5&Schulze et al.~(2011) \\
(upland forest soil)&&\\
Soil solution in 0--30\,cm depth &10--150&this study \\
(riparian wetland soil)&&\\
Soil solution in $>$30\,cm depth & 10--80&this study \\
(riparian wetland soil)&&\\
Shallow groundwater in  & 4--40&this study \\
50--100\,cm depth&&\\
(riparian wetland soil)&&\\
Deep groundwater & 0.8--3&this study \\
(3--15\,m depth)&&\\
Catchment runoff& 3--34&this study \\
\bottomhline
\end{tabular}}
\end{table}

\newpage
\subsection{DOC fluxes with runoff}

Annual fluxes of DOC with runoff were calculated by multiplying the 30\,min
discharge with the corresponding 30\,min DOC concentrations, and then
cumulated to the annual flux. Due to instrumental failure no concentrations
were available for 27\,days. For these days the fluxes were calculated with
daily average concentrations derived from the artificial neural network
interpolation (see above). The interpolated data accounted for 7\,{\%} of the
annual flux.

To simulate the effect of infrequent sampling strategies on the calculation
of annual runoff fluxes, the 30-min records of concentrations and discharge
were used. To do so, the starting dates were shifting from the 6 of August
2010 to the 12 of August 2010. Furthermore, different time resolution of
samplings ranging from 30\,min, 1\,h, 1, 2, 4, 7 and 14\,days were simulated
for each starting date. The data from these artificially created observations
were inserted into the Method 5-equation of Walling and Webb (1985) (Eq.~1)
to calculate the annual flux.
\begin{equation}
F=K \cdot Q_{r} \cdot \left( \frac{\sum^n_{i=1}C_{i}Q_{i}}{\sum^n_{i=1}Q_{i}}
\right),
\end{equation}
where $F$ stands for the annual DOC flux; $K$ stands for the conversion factor
(here number of seconds in the corresponding period of time); $Q_{r}$ stands
for the daily mean discharge of the year; $Q_{i}$ stands for the discharge at
the sampling day; $C_{i}$ stands for the DOC concentration at the sampling
day; and $n$ is the number of sampling events.

\subsection{DOC quality}

To identify the compartmental origin of DOC in runoff, the quality of DOC in
the potential source compartments was compared to the quality of DOC in
runoff. Three-dimensional fluorescence excitation-emission matrices (EEMs)
with subsequent evaluation by parallel factor analysis (PARAFAC, Stedmon et
al., 2003) were used to characterize DOC quality. DOC samples were filtered
(0.45\,\unit{mu}m nylon, WICOM, Heppenheim, Germany) and diluted if necessary
to an absorption at 254\,nm\,$<$\,0.3 to minimize inner filter effects
(ultrapure water, Barnstead Nanopure, Dubuque, Iowa, USA). Inner filter
correction was performed following McKnight et al.~(2001), as implemented in
the MATLAB toolbox by Cory and McKnight (2005). To this end, UV-VIS
absorption scans were recorded on a Varian Cary 1E spectrophotometer (range
200--800\,nm, 0.5\,nm resolution, Varian Inc., purchased by Agilent
Technologies, Santa Clara, California, United States). Sample correction
according to the toolbox of Cory and McKnight (2005) further includes blank
subtraction and normalization of fluorescence intensities to the Raman peak
intensity at an excitation of 350\,nm. Raman scans, EEMs for blanks, and
sample EEMs were recorded on a Perkin Elmer LS 55 fluorescence spectrometer
(Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) at a resolution of 0.5\,nm for emission
(300--600\,nm) and 5\,nm for excitation (240--450\,nm).

All data evaluation and PARAFAC modeling was done using MATLAB 2008a
(MathWorks, Natick, Massachusetts, USA) and following the toolbox of Cory and
McKnight (2005). Therefore, EEMs were reshaped to the appropriate resolution
and range (excitation 250--400\,nm, 5\,nm steps; emission 350--440\,nm, 2\,nm
steps). The PARAFAC Model from Cory and McKnight (2005) uses 13 fixed,
previously identified components to describe each sample EEM. These
components were found to sufficiently explain quality differences in our
samples with only small residuals remaining. As a chemical molecular
interpretation of the PARAFAC components identified by Cory and McKnight
(2005) has become a matter of discussion (Macalady and Walton-Day, 2009), we
used the 13 PARAFAC components to derive statistical fingerprints, omitting a
distinct discussion about the chemical quality of the DOC of the different
source compartments.

\subsection{Data analysis}

Data processing, statistical data analysis, and plotting were done in
R-project version 2.13.0 (R Development Core Team, 2011) if not otherwise
stated. To aggregate the 30\,min data to daily values, we used the functions
\textit{daily} from the R project package \textit{Animal} (Hanninen and
Pastell, 2009) and the function \textit{ddply} from the package \textit{plyr
}(Wickham, 2011).

%f01
\begin{figure*}[t]
\includegraphics[width=14cm]{bg-2012-383-f01.pdf}
\caption{Precipitation, discharge ($Q$), DOC concentration and riparian
groundwater level (m~u.~sf.\,=\,meter under surface) in the Lehstenbach
catchment. The $\triangledown$ indicate groundwater sampling dates for DOC
quality analysis.}
\end{figure*}

We used the classification of Butturini et al.~(2008) to characterize
hysteretic loops of 17 well distinct discharge events. We modified the
classification of Butturini et al.~(2008) such that the $\Delta C$ now is the
difference between the maximum DOC concentration at a given event and the DOC
concentration at low flow (first quartile of DOC
concentration\,=\,5.5\,mg\,L$^{-1})$. $\Delta R_\text{(DOC)}$\,({\%}) was
calculated according to Butturini et al.~(2008) and describes the area and
rotational pattern of the concentration-discharge \mbox{response}. $\Delta
R_\text{(DOC)}$\,({\%}) has a potential range from $-$100 to +100. Negative
values stand for counterclockwise loops. For $\Delta R_\text{(DOC)}$\,({\%})
discharge rates and DOC concentrations of each event were first normalized
according to Eq.~(2). Following that, each loop was rasterized by the
function \textit{locator} in $R$. The polygon areas were calculated by the
function \textit{polyarea} from the package \textit{geometry} (R Development
Core Team, 2011; Barber et al., 2012).
\begin{equation}
X_{i,0~\text{to}~1}= \frac{x_i - x_{\min}}{x_{\max} - x_{\min}}
\end{equation}

\section{Results}

\subsection{Discharge, groundwater and precipitation }

Precipitation from August 2010--August 2011 occurred at 232\,days and summed
up to 1057\,mm (Fig.~1). The highest rainfall intensity was observed on the 5 of
June 2011 with a rainfall of 15\,mm within 30\,min.

Maximum discharge was 0.89\,m$^{-3}$\,s$^{-1}$ on the 14 of January 2011
(snow melt event), minimum discharge was 0.018\,m$^{-3}$\,s$^{-1}$ on the 29
of June 2011. Discharge averaged at 0.087\,m$^{-3}$\,s$^{-1}$. Within minutes to hours, the discharge
responded to rain fall events, indicating the
flashiness of the catchment (Fig.~1).

The groundwater table in the riparian wetland soils changed rapidly in
response to precipitation events (Fig.~1). Groundwater was near surface in
August 2010, and in the winter months 2010/2011. Lowest levels were observed
on the 31 of May 2011 at 0.62\,m below surface.

\subsection{DOC concentrations}

During the one-year period, DOC concentrations in runoff averaged at
9.2\,mg\,L$^{-1}$. The minimum was 2.6\,mg\,L$^{-1}$ in May 2011, and the
maximum was 33.8\,mg\,L$^{-1}$ in September 2010 (Fig.~1). The high temporal
resolution of the DOC concentrations enabled a number of observations that
would have been missed by typically infrequent samplings. The concentrations
of DOC changed rapidly within hours and corresponded generally to the
dynamics of the groundwater table and discharge with highest concentrations
observed at near surface groundwater table in the riparian wetland soils and
high discharge. The maxima of the DOC concentrations in runoff had a time
delay of a few hours in relation to the maxima of the groundwater table and
discharge (Fig.~2). The average time delay of the DOC maxima was 160\,min
after the discharge peak and the range of delays was from 30 to 390\,min
(160\,min on average).

The DOC in runoff in response to the discharge followed counterclockwise
hysteretic loops with lower concentrations on the rising than on the falling
limb. The relation of DOC to discharge on the falling limb was steady and
uniform, whereas the relation during the rising limb was more variable for
the different events. The hysteretic loops were more pronounced and had a
steeper slope in the summer/fall than in the winter/spring period (Fig.~3a).
The characterization of 17 well distinct hysteretic loops confirmed the
generally larger concentration range ($\Delta C$) of loops in the summer/fall
than in the winter/spring period (Fig.~4). All loops had a negative $\Delta
R_\text{(DOC)}$ indicating the counterclockwise loops. However, single events
with small discharge in summer/fall had similar loop characteristics than in
the winter/spring period.

%f02
\begin{figure}[t]
\includegraphics[width=8.5cm]{bg-2012-383-f02.pdf}
\caption{Dynamics of DOC concentrations in runoff and riparian groundwater
level in August 2010.}
\end{figure}


%f03
\begin{figure}[t]
\textbf{(a)}\includegraphics[width=8.3cm]{bg-2012-383-f03a.pdf}
\textbf{(b)}\includegraphics[width=8.3cm]{bg-2012-383-f03b.pdf}
\caption{\textbf{(a)} Counterclockwise hysteretic loops of DOC concentrations
in response to discharge for summer/fall, and for winter/spring. \textbf{(b)}
DOC concentrations response at low discharge changes ($<$60\,L\,s$^{-1}$)}
\end{figure}


%f04
\begin{figure}[t]
\includegraphics[width=8.5cm]{bg-2012-383-f04.pdf}
\caption{Parameters of hysteretic loops in different time periods. For the
calculation of $\Delta R_\text{(DOC)}$ and $\Delta C$ (mg\,L$^{-1}$), see
Sect.~2.6.1.}
\end{figure}


A more detailed view of the DOC/discharge relation at low flow conditions
(discharge\,$<$\,60\,L\,s$^{-1})$ and low DOC concentrations levels (Fig.~3b)
indicates, that DOC concentrations in the summer/fall period almost directly
respond to even small changes in discharge, whereas the response of DOC to
discharge was smaller in the winter/spring period.

\subsection{DOC quality}

The DOC fingerprinting by fluorescence excitation-emission matrices with
subsequent PARAFAC analysis clearly separated DOC originating from deep
groundwater, shallow groundwater from riparian wetland soils and from runoff
(Fig.~5). From the 13 fluorescence components of the applied PARAFAC Model
(nomenclature according to Cory and McKnight 2005 is given in brackets),
components 1 (C1), 5 (SQ1), and 6 (unidentified) were more prominent in
riparian wetland samples; components 3 (unidentified), 8 (Tryptophan-like),
and 12 (Q3) were more prominent in groundwater samples. Exemplarily, we used
component 1 (C1, Cory and McKnight, 2005) indicative of samples from riparian
wetland soils, and component 12 (Q3) as indicative of groundwater samples
(other components not shown). Contribution of component 1 in DOC-fluorescence
of runoff samples lined up between deep groundwater and the shallow
groundwater of wetland riparian soils, suggesting a mixture of both sources,
but clearly dominated by wetland-borne DOC.

Using both component 1 and component 12 (Cory and McKnight, 2005), a clear
separation of samples was possible (Fig.~5), yielding 2 groups of either
groundwater dominated or wetland-borne dominated DOC. While fluorescence of
samples from shallow groundwater in riparian wetland soils was characterized
by higher relative contribution of component 1, deeper groundwater samples
where characterized by higher contribution of component 12. With respect to
these two distinctive components, DOC quality in upstream runoff, with
negligible influence from riparian wetland water and closer to a groundwater
spring, was similar to deep groundwater samples (Fig.~5, open diamonds). A
rise in DOC concentrations with discharge always coincided with an increasing
contribution of component 1 and a decrease in component 12 (Fig.~6). Even at
low flow conditions\,$<$\,60\,L\,s$^{-1}$ the contribution of component 1
exceeded the contribution of component 12.

%f05
\begin{figure}[t]
\includegraphics[width=8.5cm]{bg-2012-383-f05.pdf}
\caption{Quality of DOC from different source compartments as revealed by
fluorescence excitation-emission matrices and PARAFAC analysis.}
\end{figure}

\subsection{DOC fluxes with runoff}

The cumulative DOC fluxes calculated from the 30\,min time resolution
followed generally the cumulative discharge and amounted to
84\,kg\,DOC\,ha$^{-1}$\,yr$^{-1}$. However, in the summer and autumn 2010,
the curve for DOC was often steeper than for discharge (data not shown).

The annual flux from the 30\,min time resolution is taken here as the
``true'' reference flux. The simulated increase in sampling interval, with
subsequent calculation of annual fluxes according to Eq.~(1), revealed that
the ``true reference flux'' was matched with less than 10\,{\%} deviation at
sampling intervals of up to 2\,days. Simulated intervals\,$>$\,2\,days
resulted in substantial errors, with the largest range of annual fluxes
observed at the fortnightly samplings (range from
57--124\,kg\,DOC\,ha$^{-1}$\,yr$^{-1})$.

\section{Discussion}

\subsection{Range, origin and mobilization of DOC in runoff}

In comparison to other studies in forested watersheds, temporal variations
and average concentrations of DOC in runoff at Lehstenbach
(9.2\,mg\,L$^{-1})$ are high (Jeong et al., 2012; Koehler et al., 2009;
Inamdar et al., 2012), probably due to the high proportion of wetlands in the
catchment, representing a major source. Roulet et al.~(2007) reported even
higher average DOC concentrations of 47.5\,$\pm$\,13\,mg\,L$^{-1}$ in the
discharge of a northern ombrotrophic bog, stressing the role of peatlands in
DOC release. Short-term variations of DOC in runoff have been related to
changing water flow paths under high-flow, draining different compartments
than under baseflow conditions (Hood et al., 2006). In the Lehstenbach
catchment, the quality of DOC, concentration range and groundwater dynamics
point to the riparian wetland soils as the main source of DOC in runoff under
high-flow and also under low-flow conditions, corroborating previous studies
(Jaff\'{e} et al., 2008; Inamdar et al., 2012). As also reported by Inamdar
et al.~(2012), deep groundwater and shallow wetland groundwater differed in
their contribution of fluorescence components 3 and 5 (Cory and McKnight,
2005), respectively. In our case, the best separation was achieved based on
components 1 (wetland) and 12 (deep groundwater), and the decrease of the
groundwater component with rising discharge and the increase of the wetland
component strongly suggested the riparian wetland soils as the origin of both
the fast runoff components (Frei et al., 2010) and high DOC concentration.

%f06
\begin{figure}[t]
\includegraphics[width=8.5cm]{bg-2012-383-f06.pdf}
\caption{DOC concentration and quality parameters in response to discharge.
The lines for components 1 and 12 were fitted using the $R$ function
\textit{smooth.spline} and 3 degrees of freedom. The line for DOC
concentrations was fitted using the $R$ function \textit{lowess} with a
smoothing span of $f=0.5$.}
\end{figure}

We have measured DOC quality in the compartments ``deep groundwater'' and
``shallow groundwater in the riparian wetland soils'' only at 4 dates. As our
results agree with the findings of Inamdar et al.~(2012), we are, confident
that no major changes in DOC quality in these compartments can be expected.
The residence time of deep groundwater in our catchment is too long (about
4\,yr) to influence the short-term quality of DOC in runoff. The pool of DOC
in the upper horizons of the wetland soils is large (we calculated a storage
of about 120\,kg\,DOC\,ha$^{-1}$ wetland area in the upper 20\,cm which will
turn over only about 2 times per year) and its quality mirrors the peat
quality. Lastly, the spectroscopic properties of DOC mostly result from
refractory humic substances with low temporal dynamics.

Although an interpretation in a molecular sense of PARAFAC derived
fluorescence components from Cory and McKnight (2005) seems to be limited
(Macalady and Walton-Day, 2009, 2011), this approach proved to be suitable
for distinguishing DOC compartmental sources in our study, when interpreting
fluorescence compounds as bulk quality indices or fingerprints (Fellman et
al., 2009; Inamdar et al., 2012). Following Cory and McKnight (2005),
component 1 was correlated to Ketal or Acetal Carbon as analyzed by $^{13}$C
NMR, and component 12 to {\%} aliphatic carbon content. Due to its refractory
character, a higher proportion of aliphatic carbon seems reasonable in
groundwater with longer residence times. Fellmann et al.~(2009) attributed an
increase in riparian wetland-borne DOC to increases in tryptophan-like
fluorescence, with tryptophan being a labile amino acid, indicating presence
or proteins. According to the PARAFAC Model of Cory and McKnight (2005), who
assigned component 8 to tryptophane-like fluorescence, in our dataset
tryptophane-like or protein-like fluorescence was higher in deep groundwater
than in shallow groundwater from riparian wetland soils. Such relative
increase in protein-like fluorescence in deep groundwater samples has also
been observed by Inamdar et al.~(2012) suggesting that there is also
bioavailable carbon in deep groundwater, although in much lower
concentration. This discrepancy of our study and the study of Inamdar et
al.~(2012) to findings of Fellmann et al.~(2009) may be explained by specific
differences in the watersheds (temperate regions versus high latitudes), but
it also indicates that the interpretation of PARAFAC modeling is probably not
always unique and needs to be done with caution. Nevertheless, the identified
fluorescence components from Cory and McKnight (2005) seemed to have more
power in differentiating the source compartments of DOC than more simple
optical indices (Inamdar et al., 2012).

The conclusion about the riparian wetland soils as the compartmental source
for DOC in runoff is also supported by the low DOC concentrations in deeper
soil layers and deep groundwater (Table~1). Forested upland soils as a
potential source of peaking DOC concentrations can be ruled out since surface
runoff, that could rapidly connect the upper soil layers with the streams, is
not observed in the Lehstenbach catchment. The water percolating the forest
floor layers enters deeper groundwater after DOC being removed largely by
sorption or decomposition in the soil (Schulze et al., 2011), resulting in
DOC concentrations in the groundwater of only about 1--3\,mg\,L$^{-1}$
(Table~1). Lastly, increasing DOC in runoff always coincided with shallow
groundwater levels in the riparian wetland soils, as also observed by Morel
et al.~(2009) for a headwater catchment.

\subsection{Temporal dynamics of DOC in runoff}

An explanation for the observed short-term variations of DOC in runoff is the
non-linear increase in catchment discharge with rising riparian groundwater
levels. This increase is probably the combined effect of efficient surface
flow networks that develop when groundwater levels reach surface depressions
(Frei et al., 2010) and a general non-linear decrease of lateral hydraulic
conductivity with depth (e.g.~Seibert et al., 2009). Both mechanisms result
in a rapid, non-linear increase of drainage efficiency of the system when
riparian groundwater levels are rising. The latter mechanism has been termed
\textit{Transmissivity Feedback} (Bishop et al., 2004) and was shown to
control the transfer of solutes from the riparian zone to the streams
(Seibert et al., 2009). The lateral hydraulic conductivity is typically lower
in the deeper layers of wetland soils due to the compacted and more
decomposed organic matter than in the porous and less decomposed shallow
layers. The differences in hydraulic conductivities between deeper layers and
shallow layers of wetland soils can be several orders of magnitude (Jacks and
Norrstr\"{o}m, 2004) causing shallow layers to drain much more effectively
than deep soil layers. The shallow layers of the riparian wetland soils in
the Lehstenbach catchment typically contain more DOC than deeper soil layers
(Table~1). Rising groundwater levels in the riparian soils progressively
engage soil layers with higher hydraulic conductivity and increasing DOC
concentrations in the runoff generation process causing the strong response
of DOC in runoff. The DOC pool available for mobilization in the riparian
wetland soils seems to be large (Worrall et al., 2008) as in our study
there was also no decrease in maximum DOC concentrations during subsequent rain
events.

The majority of hysteretic loops in the discharge concentration response of
DOC in the literature are clockwise (e.g.~Hornberger et al., 1994; Butturini
et al., 2006; Jeong et al., 2012). This was also reported in studies where
DOC was found to originate mainly from riparian wetland soils (McGlynn and
McDonnell, 2003; Hood et al., 2006). Minding the proposed
\textit{Transmissivity Feedback} (Bishop et al., 2004) for DOC exports and
highest DOC concentrations in the riparian wetland soils, this would also be
expected for our catchment. However, we observed counterclockwise hysteretic
loops, with the peak of DOC concentration on the falling limb of the
hydrograph. Evans and Davies (1998) used hysteretic loops to analyze episode
hydrochemistry and hydrologic characteristics of catchments. According to
their classification the Lehstenbach catchment falls into the category A2:
Counterclockwise and positive. The A2 type requires a near surface
hydrological component with lower DOC concentrations than in the soil
solution and shallow groundwater of the riparian wetland soils. A similar
finding with maximum concentrations of DOC on the falling limp of runoff was
explained by the dilution of runoff in the initial phase of the storm by
throughfall (Hagedorn et al., 2000). Beside throughfall effects, the
counterclockwise hysteretic loops in our study are likely caused by the still
existing ditches in the wetland soils. The restricted contact between this
runoff component and the DOC-rich riparian wetland soil layers during initial
runoff will result in lower DOC concentrations in the rising than in the
falling limb. The effect of the bypass seems short-term as indicated by the
few hours delay of the DOC peaks in relation to the discharge peaks.

The mobilization of DOC from soil organic matter often follows seasonal
patterns with increasing concentrations during the summer. This has been
shown for forest floors (Michalzik and Matzner, 1999; G\"{o}dde et al.,
1996) as well as for wetland soils (Koehler et al., 2011; Clair et al.,
2002). The mobilization of DOC from soil organic matter is partly driven by
microbial (enzymatic) processes and partly by physicochemical processes
(Bolan et al., 2011), both being temperature dependent. Hence, the steeper
slope of the hysteretic loops and the more pronounced hysteresis in the
summer/fall than in the winter/spring period seems largely due to a
temperature effect on DOC mobilization.

In addition, the flow paths of water in the winter might be different from
the summer/autumn, since the top layers of the riparian wetland soils -- in
summer responsible for high DOC concentrations in runoff -- might not be
drained due to freezing.

\subsection{Annual DOC fluxes}

The annual export of DOC from the Lehstenbach catchment
(84\,kg\,ha$^{-1}$\,yr$^{-1})$ was found to be rather high in comparison to other
forested watersheds. Kindler et al.~(2011) calculated average DOC losses for
5 Northern European forested catchments of 35\,kg\,ha$^{-1}$\,yr$^{-1}$.
However, Hagedorn et al.~(2000) reported an export of even
185\,kg\,DOC\,ha$^{-1}$\,yr$^{-1}$ from an alpine, Gleysol dominated forest
ecosystem. The DOC fluxes at the Lehstenbach catchment are relatively high
because of the substantial portion of riparian wetland soils. Laudon et
al.~(2011) defined the ratio of wetland to upland soils in boreal forested
catchments as a driving variable for the DOC export. However, they suggest
that the proportion of DOC from wetlands decrease with rising discharge as
the contribution of water from upland zones increases. In our study we
observed the opposite, since the proportion of DOC from riparian wetland
soils increased with discharge, questioning the generality of the postulated
relation from Laudon et al.~(2011).

Depending on the precipitation regime, a substantial interannual variation of
DOC exports can be expected. The long-term (1988--2008) annual discharge at
Lehstenbach varied from 280 to 730\,mm with a mean value of 460\,mm (Lischeid
et al., 2004, and unpublished data). The annual discharge in the measuring
period was quite low (360\,mm) and the fluxes in 2010/2011 may underrepresent
the long-term DOC export. Nevertheless, if we take the annual DOC flux in
2010/2011 (84\,kg\,ha$^{-1}$\,yr$^{-1})$ as representative and assume that
the majority originates from the riparian wetland soils (30\,{\%} of the
catchment area), the export from the riparian wetland soils will be in the
range of 240\,kg\,DOC\,ha$^{-1}$\,yr$^{-1}$. This export equals the average C
accumulation rates of northern peatlands (Lavoie et al., 2005), emphasizing
the huge contribution of DOC exports to the C budget of wetland ecosystems.

Under conditions comparable to those of the Lehstenbach catchment, massive
errors in calculating annual DOC export fluxes are likely if based on
infrequent samplings at intervals\,$>$\,2\,days, with fluxes varying up to
factor 3 if fortnightly random samplings were simulated. The effect of
sampling strategy on the accuracy of annual fluxes will depend on catchment
characteristics, the slope of the discharge/concentration relation, the
discharge dynamics and a general recommendation cannot be made. Under
differing conditions in an Atlantic bog catchment, a weekly or even monthly
sampling frequency was adequate to calculate the yearly DOC flux with runoff
(Koehler et al., 2009).

The DOC concentrations and fluxes in the Lehstenbach runoff had a general
increasing trend in the recent decades like in many other forested watersheds
in Europe and North America (Skjelkv{\aa}le et al., 2005; SanClements et
al., 2012). The increase in case of the Lehstenbach amounted to about
0.3\,mg\,L$^{-1}$\,yr$^{-1}$ from 1987 to 2010 (data not shown). The
increasing trend likely resulted from decreasing deposition of S in the past
decades, increased pH of the precipitation and lower ionic strength of soil
solutions causing enhanced mobilizing of DOC from soil organic matter
(Monteith et al., 2007; Clark et al., 2011). With regard to future
developments of DOC exports, we expect further increasing DOC concentrations
and export fluxes: as mentioned above, the general temperature rise likely
triggers DOC release from the source compartments. Temperature rise will be
especially relevant in winter, because of expected changes in snow cover and
more frequent water flow through DOC rich soil compartments in the less
frozen soils of the future (Campbell et al., 2010). On top of that, predicted
changes in summerly precipitation patterns towards longer periods of drought
and more frequent high precipitation and discharge events (IPCC, 2007) will likely
also result in increasing DOC exports from the Lehstenbach catchment.

\conclusions

The high frequency measurements of DOC in the Lehstenbach catchment revealed
substantial variations of concentrations at hourly to daily time scales.
Concentrations increased with discharge in counterclockwise, hysteretic
loops, the degree of hysteresis and the response of concentrations being more
pronounced in the summer/fall than in the winter/spring period. The DOC
export in runoff originated mainly from the riparian wetland soils, and
represents a major contribution to their overall C budget.

Calculations of annual DOC fluxes with runoff, if based on infrequent
samplings, are prone to significant errors if steep concentration/discharge
relations exist.

Predicted climatic changes, like more frequent intensive precipitation and
discharge events, and the generally rising temperatures likely will enlarge
the DOC export from this catchment.

\newpage
\begin{acknowledgements}
This study was financially supported by the Bavarian Environmental Agency
(LfU, Landesamt f\"{u}r Umwelt, Hof, Germany and by the International
Research Training Group TERRECO (GRK 1565/1) funded by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). We thank Johannes L\"{u}ers and Thomas Foken
(Micrometeorology, University of Bayreuth) for providing precipitation data.
Further, we acknowledge the analytical work by the laboratory staff of the
Department of Hydrology, University of Bayreuth, namely Martina Rohr, Jutta
Eckert, Silke Hammer and Sarah Hofmann, and the help in the field work by Uwe
Hell.

We are thankful to Andrea Butturini and an anonymous reviewer for their
constructive comments that helped to improve the paper.\\
\\
Edited by: T.~J.~Battin
\end{acknowledgements}


\begin{thebibliography}{}

\bibitem{}
{\AA}gren, A., Buffam, I., Berggren, M., Bishop, K., Jansson, M., and Laudon,
H.: Dissolved organic carbon characteristics in boreal streams in a
forest-wetland gradient during the transition between winter and summer, J.
Geophys. Res.-Biogeo., 113, G03031, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2007JG000674}{doi:10.1029/2007JG000674}, 2008.

\bibitem{}
Alewell, C., Lischeid, G., Hell, U., and Manderscheid, B.: High temporal
resolution of ion fluxes in semi-natural ecosystems -- gain of information or
waste of resources? Biogeochemistry, 69, 19--35,
\href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/B:BIOG.0000031029.46798.7f}{doi:10.1023/B:BIOG.0000031029.46798.7f}, 2004.

\bibitem{}
Austnes, K., Evans, C. D., Eliot-Laize, C., Naden, P. S., and Old, G. H.:
Effects of storm events on mobilisation and in-stream processing of dissolved
organic matter (DOM) in a Welsh peatland catchment, Biogeochemistry, 99,
157--173, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10533-009-9399-4}{doi:10.1007/s10533-009-9399-4}, 2010.

\bibitem{}
Barber, C. B., Habel, K., Grasman, R., Gramacy, R. B., Stahel, A., and
Sterratt, D. C.: geometry: Mesh generation and surface tesselation, R package
version 0.3-2, \url{http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=geometry}, 2012

\bibitem{}
Bishop, K., Seibert, J., Koher, S., and Laudon, H.: Resolving the double
paradox of rapidly mobilized old water with highly variable responses in
runoff chemistry, Hydrol. Process., 18, 185--189, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hyp.5209}{doi:10.1002/hyp.5209}, 2004.

\bibitem{}
Bolan, N. S., Adriano, D. C., Kunhikrishnan, A., James, T., McDowell, R., and
Senesi, N.: Chapter one -- dissolved organic matter: Biogeochemistry,
dynamics, and environmental significance in soils, Adv. Agron., 110, 1--75,
\href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385531-2.00001-3}{doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-385531-2.00001-3}, 2011.

\bibitem{}
Boyer, E. W., Hornberger, G. M., Bencala, K. E., and McKnight, M. D.: Effects
of asynchronous snowmelt on flushing of dissolved organic carbon: a mixing
model approach, Hydrol. Process., 14, 3291--3308, 2000.

\bibitem{}
Butturini, A., Gallart, F., Latron, J., Vazquez, E., and Sabater, F.:
Cross-site comparison of variability of DOC and nitrate c-q hysteresis during
the autumn-winter period in three Mediterranean headwater streams: A
synthetic approach, Biogeochemistry, 77, 327--349,
\href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10533-005-0711-7}{doi:10.1007/s10533-005-0711-7}, 2006.

\bibitem{}
Butturini, A., Alvarez M., Bernal, S., Vazquez, E., and Sabater, F.:
Diversity and Temporal Sequences of Forms of DOC and NO$_3$-discharge
Responses in an Intermittent Stream: Predictable or Random Succession?, J.
Geophys. Res., 113, G03016, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2008JG000721}{doi:10.1029/2008JG000721}, 2008.

\newpage
\bibitem{}
Campbell, J. L., Ollinger, S. V., Flerchinger, G. N., Wicklein, H., Hayhoe,
K., and Bailey, A. S.: Past and projected future changes in snowpack and soil
frost at the Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest, New Hampshire, USA, Hydrol.
Proc., 24, 2465--2480, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hyp.7666}{doi:10.1002/hyp.7666}, 2010.

\bibitem{}
Chapman, T.: A Comparison of Algorithms for Stream Flow Recession and
Baseflow Separation, Hydrol. Process., 714, 701--714, 1999.

\bibitem{}
Clair, T. A., Arp, P., Moore, T. R., Dalva, M., and Meng, F. R.: Gaseous
carbon dioxide and methane, as well as dissolved organic carbon losses from a
small temperate wetland under a changing climate, Environ. Pollut., 116,
S143--S148, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0269-7491(01)00267-6}{doi:10.1016/S0269-7491(01)00267-6}, 2002.

\bibitem{}
Clark, J. M., Van Der Heijden, G. M. F., Palmer, S. M., Chapman, P. J., and
Bottrell, S. H.: Variation in the sensitivity of DOC release between
different organic soils following H$_{2}$SO$_{4}$ and sea-salt additions,
Eur. Soil Sci., 62, 267--284, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2389.2010.01344.x}{doi:10.1111/j.1365-2389.2010.01344.x}, 2011.

\bibitem{}
Cory, R. M. and McKnight, D. M.: Fluorescence spectroscopy reveals ubiquitous
presence of oxidized and reduced quinones in dissolved organic matter,
Environ. Sci. Technol., 39, 8142--8149, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/es0506962}{doi:10.1021/es0506962}, 2005.

\bibitem{}
Degens, E. T., Kempe, S., and Richey, J.: Biogeochemistry of major world
rivers : Summary, in: Biogeochemistry of Major World Rivers, edited by:
Degens, E. T., Kempe, S., and Richey, J., SCOPE Report 42, 323--347, J. Wiley
{\&} Sons, Chichester, New York, Brisbane, Toronto, Singapore, 1991.

\bibitem{}
Evans, C. and Davies, T. D.: Causes of concentration/discharge hysteresis and
its potential as a tool for analysis of episode hydrochemistry, Water Resour.
Res., 34, 129--137, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/97WR01881}{doi:10.1029/97WR01881}, 1998.

\bibitem{}
Fellman, J. B., Hood, E., Edwards, R. T., and D'Amore, D. V.: Changes in the
concentration, biodegradability, and fluorescent properties of dissolved
organic matter during stormflows in coastal temperate watersheds, J. Geophys.
Res.-Biogeo., 114, GO1021, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2008JG000790}{doi:10.1029/2008JG000790}, 2009.

\bibitem{}
Frei, S., Lischeid, G., and Fleckenstein, J. H.: Effects of micro-topography
on surface-subsurface exchange and runoff generation in a virtual riparian
wetland -- A modeling study, Adv. Water Resour., 33, 1388--1401,
\href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.advwatres.2010.07.006}{doi:10.1016/j.advwatres.2010.07.006}, 2010.

\bibitem{}
G\"{o}dde, M., David, M. B., Christ, M. J., Kaupenjohann, M., and Vance, G.
F.: Carbon mobilization from the forest floor under red spruce in the
northeastern USA, Soil Biol. Biochem., 28, 1181--1189,
\href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0038-0717(96)00130-7}{doi:10.1016/0038-0717(96)00130-7}, 1996.

\bibitem{}
Hagedorn, F., Schleppi, P., Waldner, P., and Fluhler, H.: Export of dissolved
organic carbon and nitrogen from Gleysol dominated catchments -- the
significance of water flow paths, Biogeochemistry, 50, 137--161,
\href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1006398105953}{doi:10.1023/A:1006398105953}, 2000.

\bibitem{}
Halliday, S. J., Wade, A. J., Skeffington, R. A., Neal, C., Reynolds, B.,
Rowland, P., Neal, M., and Norris, D.: An analysis of long-term trends,
seasonality and short-term dynamics in water quality data from Plynlimon,
Wales, Sci. Total Environ., 434, 186--200,
\href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/J.scitotenv.2011.10.052}{doi:10.1016/J.scitotenv.2011.10.052}, 2012.

\bibitem{}
Hanninen, L. and Pastell, M.: CowLog: open source software for coding
behaviors from digital video, Behav. Res. Methods, 41, 472--476,
\href{http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/BRM.41.2.472}{doi:10.3758/BRM.41.2.472}, 2009.

\bibitem{}
Hinton, M. J., Schiff, S. L., and English, M. C.: The significance of storms
for the concentration and export of dissolved organic \mbox{carbon} from two
Precambrian Shield catchments, Biogeochemistry, 36, 67--88,
\href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1005779711821}{doi:10.1023/A:1005779711821},
1997.

\bibitem{}
Hood, E., Gooseff, M. N., and Johnson, S. L.: Changes in the character of
stream water dissolved organic carbon during flushing in three small
watersheds, Oregon, J. Geophys. Res.-Biogeo., 111, G01007,
\href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2005JG000082}{doi:10.1029/2005JG000082}, 2006.

\bibitem{}
Hornberger, G. M., Bencala, K. E., and McKnight, D. M.: Hydrological controls
on dissolved organic carbon during snowmelt in the snake river near
montezuma, Colorado, Biogeochemistry, 25, 147--165, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00024390}{doi:10.1007/BF00024390},
1994.

\bibitem{}
Inamdar S. I., Finger, N., Singh, S., Mitchell, M., Levia, D., Bais, H.,
Scott, D., and McHale, P.: Dissolved organic matter (DOM) concentration and
quality in a forested mid-Atlantic watershed, USA, Biogeochemistry, 108,
55--76, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10533-011-9572-4}{doi:10.1007/s10533-011-9572-4}, 2012.

\bibitem{}
IPCC: Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups
I, II and III to the Forth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change, IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, 2007.

\bibitem{}
Ishii, S. K. L. and Boyer, T. H.: Behavior of reoccurring parafac components
in fluorescent dissolved organic matter in natural and engineered systems: A
critical review, Environ. Sci. Technol. 46, 2006--2017,
\href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/es2043504}{doi:10.1021/es2043504}, 2012.

\bibitem{}
IUSS Working~Group WRB: ``World Reference Base for Soil Resources 2006, first
update 2007'', Number 103, FAO, Rome, 2007.

\bibitem{}
Jacks, G. and Norrstr\"{o}m, A.-C.: Hydrochemistry and hydrology of forest
riparian wetlands, For. Ecol. Manage. 196, 187--197,
\href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2004.01.055}{doi:10.1016/j.foreco.2004.01.055}, 2004.

\bibitem{}
Jaff\'{e}, R., McKnight, D., Maie, N., Cory, R., McDowell, W. H., and
Campbell, J. L.: Spatial and temporal variations in DOM composition in
ecosystems: The importance of long-term monitoring of optical properties. J.
Geophys. Res., 113, G04032, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2008JG000683}{doi:10.1029/2008JG000683}, 2008.

\bibitem{}
Jeong, J.-J., Bartsch, S., Fleckenstein, J., Matzner, E., Tenhunen, J. D.,
Lee, S. D., Park, S. D., and Park, J.-H.: Differential storm responses of
dissolved and particulate organic carbon in a mountainous headwater stream,
investigated by high-frequency in-situ optical measurements, J. Geophys.
Res., 117, G03013, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2012JG001999}{doi:10.1029/2012JG001999}, 2012.

\bibitem{}
Kalbitz, K., Solinger, S., Park, J.-H., Michalzik, B., and Matzner, E.:
Controls on the dynamics of dissolved organic matter in soils: A review, Soil
Sci., 165, 277--304, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10021-003-0236-7}{doi:10.1007/s10021-003-0236-7}, 2000.

\bibitem{}
Kindler, R., Siemens, J., Kaiser, K., Walmsley, D. C., Bernhofer, C.,
Buchmann, N., Cellier, P., Eugster, W., Gleixner, G., Grunwald, T., Heim, A.,
Ibrom, A., Jones, S. K., Jones, M., Klumpp, K., Kutsch, W., Steenberg Larsen,
K., Lehuger, S., Loubet, B., McKenzie, R., Moors, E., Osborne, B., Pilegaard,
K., Rebmann, C., Saunders, M., Schmidt, M. W. I., Schrumpf, M., Seyfferth,
J., Skiba, U., Soussana, J.-F., Sutton, M. A., Tefs, C., Vowinckel. B.,
Zeeman, M. J., and Kaupenjohann, M.: Dissolved carbon leaching from soil is a
crucial component of the net ecosystem carbon balance, Glob. Change Biol.,
17, 1167--1185, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2486.2010.02282.x}{doi:10.1111/j.1365-2486.2010.02282.x}, 2011.

\bibitem{}
Kirchner, J. W., Feng, X. H., Neal, C., and Robson, A. J.: The fine structure
of water-quality dynamics: the (high-frequency) wave of the future, Hydrol.
Process., 18, 1353--1359, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hyp.5537}{doi:10.1002/hyp.5537}, 2004.

\bibitem{}
Koehler, A.-K., Murphy, K., Kiely, G., and Sottocornola, M.: Seasonal
variation of doc concentration and annual loss of doc from an atlantic
blanket bog in south western Ireland, Biogeochemistry, 95, 231--242,
\href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10533-009-9333-9}{doi:10.1007/s10533-009-9333-9}, 2009.

\bibitem{}
Koehler, A.-K., Sottocornola, M., and Kiely, G.: How strong is the current
carbon sequestration of an Atlantic blanket bog?, Glob. Change Biol., 17,
309--319, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2486.2010.02180.x}{doi:10.1111/j.1365-2486.2010.02180.x}, 2011.

\bibitem{}
Laudon, H., Berggren, M., {\AA}gren, A., Buffam, I., Bishop, K., Grabs, T.,
Jansson, M., and K\"{o}hler, S.: Patterns and dynamics of dissolved organic
carbon (DOC) in boreal streams: The role of processes, connectivity, and
scaling, Ecosystems, 14, 880--893, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10021-011-9452-8}{doi:10.1007/s10021-011-9452-8}, 2011.

\bibitem{}
Lavoie, M., Pare, D., and Bergeron, Y.: Impact of global change and forest
management on carbon sequestration in northern forested peatlands, Environ.
Rev., 13, 199--240, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1139/a05-014}{doi:10.1139/a05-014}, 2005.

\bibitem{}
Lischeid, G., Kolb, A., and Alewell, C.: Apparent translatory flow in
groundwater recharge and runoff generation, J. Hydrol., 265, 195--211,
\href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0022-1694(02)00108-7}{doi:10.1016/S0022-1694(02)00108-7}, 2002.

\bibitem{}
Lischeid, G., Alewell, C., Moritz, K., and Bittersohl, J.: Trends in the
input-output relations: The catchment budgets, in: Biogeochemistry of
forested catchments in a changing environment: a German case study, edited
by: Matzner, E., Ecol. Stud., Springer Verlag, 172, 437--456, 2004.

\bibitem{}
Ludwig, W., Probst, J. L., and Kempe, S.: Predicting the oceanic input of
organic carbon by continental erosion, Global Biogeochem. Cy., 10, 23--41,
\href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/95GB02925}{doi:10.1029/95GB02925}, 1996.

\bibitem{}
Macalady, D. L. and Walton-Day, K.: New light on a dark subject: On the use
of fluorescence data to deduce redox states of natural organic matter (NOM),
Aquat. Sci., 71, 135--143, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00027-009-9174-6}{doi:10.1007/s00027-009-9174-6}, 2009.

\bibitem{}
Macalady, D. L. and Walton-Day, K.: Redox chemistry and natural organic
matter (NOM): Geochemists' dream, analytical chemists' nightmare, Aquatic
Redox Chemistry, Chapter 5, 85--111, ACS Symposium Series, 1071,
\href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/bk-2011-1071.ch005}{doi:10.1021/bk-2011-1071.ch005}, 2011.

\bibitem{}
Matzner, E.: Biogeochemistry of Forested Catchments in a Changing
Environment: A German Case Study, Ecol. Stud., Springer, 172, 2004.

\bibitem{}
McGlynn, B. L. and McDonnell, J. J.: Role of discrete landscape units in
controlling catchment dissolved organic carbon dynamics, Water Resour. Res.,
39, 1090, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2002WR001525}{doi:10.1029/2002WR001525}, 2003.

\bibitem{}
McKnight, D. M., Boyer, E. W., Westerhoff, P. K., Doran, P. T., Kulbe, T.,
and Andersen, D. T.: Spectrofluorometric characterization of dissolved
organic matter for indication of precursor organic material and aromaticity,
Limnol. Oceanogr., 46, 38--48, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.4319/lo.2001.46.1.0038}{doi:10.4319/lo.2001.46.1.0038}, 2001.

\bibitem{}
Michalzik, B. and Matzner, E.: Dynamics of dissolved organic nitrogen and
carbon in a Central European Norway spruce ecosystem, Eur. J. Soil Sci., 50,
579--590, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2389.1999.00267.x}{doi:10.1046/j.1365-2389.1999.00267.x}, 1999.

\bibitem{}
Monteith, D. T., Stoddard, J. L., Evans, C. D., de Wit, H. A., Forsius, M.,
H{\o}g{\aa}sen, T., Wilander, A., Skjelkv{\aa}le, B. L., Feffries, D. S.,
Vuorenmaa, J., Keller, B., Kopacek, J., and Vesely, J.: Dissolved organic
carbon trends resulting from changes in atmospheric deposition chemistry,
Nature, 450, 537--540, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature06316}{doi:10.1038/nature06316}, 2007.

\bibitem{}
Morel, B., Durand, P., Jaffrezic, A., Gruau, G., and Molenat, J.: Sources of
dissolved organic carbon during stormflow in a headwater agricultural
catchment, Hydrol. Process., 23, 2888--2901, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hyp.7379}{doi:10.1002/hyp.7379}, 2009.

\bibitem{}
Pacific, V. J., Jencso, K. G., and McGlynn, B. L.: Variable flushing
mechanisms and landscape structure control stream DOC export during snowmelt
in a set of nested catchments, Biogeochemistry, 99, 193--211,
\href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10533-009-9401-1}{doi:10.1007/s10533-009-9401-1}, 2010.

\bibitem{}
Pellerin, B. A., Saraceno, J. F., Shanley, J. B., Sebestyen, S. D., Aiken, G.
R., Wollheim, W. M., and Bergamaschi, B. A.: Taking the pulse of snowmelt: in
situ sensors reveal seasonal, event and diurnal patterns of nitrate and
dissolved organic matter variability in an upland forest stream,
Biiogeochemistry, 108, 183--198, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10533-011-9589-8}{doi:10.1007/s10533-011-9589-8}, 2012.

\bibitem{}
R Development Core Team: ``R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
Computing'', R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, ISBN
3-900051-07-0, 2011.

\bibitem{}
Raymond, P. A. and Saiers, J. E.: Event controlled DOC export from forested
watersheds, Biogeochemistry, 100, 197--209, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10533-010-9416-7}{doi:10.1007/s10533-010-9416-7},
2010.

\bibitem{}
Roulet, N. T., Lafleur, P. M., Richard, P. J. H., Moore, T. R., Humphreys, E.
R., and Bubier, J.: Contemporary carbon balance and late holocene carbon
accumulation in a northern peatland, Glob. Change Biol., 13, 397--411,
\href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2486.2006.01292.x}{doi:10.1111/j.1365-2486.2006.01292.x}, 2007.

\bibitem{}
SanClements, M. D., Oelsner, G. P., McKnight, D. M., Stoddard, J. L., and
Nelson, S. J.: New insights into the source of decadal increases of dissolved
organic matter in acid-sensitive lakes of the Northeastern United States,
Environ. Sci. Technol., 46, 3213--3219, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/es204321x}{doi:10.1021/es204321x}, 2012.

\bibitem{}
Schulze, K., Borken, W., and Matzner, E.: Dynamics of dissolved organic C-14
in throughfall and soil solution of a Norway spruce forest, Biogeochemistry,
106, 461--473, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10533-010-9526-2}{doi:10.1007/s10533-010-9526-2}, 2011.

\newpage
\bibitem{}
Seibert, J., Grabs, T., K\"{o}hler, S., Laudon, H., Winterdahl, M., and
Bishop, K.: Linking soil- and stream-water chemistry based on a Riparian
Flow-Concentration Integration Model, Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 13,
2287--2297, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.5194/hess-13-2287-2009}{doi:10.5194/hess-13-2287-2009}, 2009.

\bibitem{}
Skjelkv{\aa}le, B. L., Stoddard, J. L., Jeffries, D. S., T{\o}rseth, K.,
H{\o}g{\aa}sen, T., Bowman, J., Mannio, J., Monteith, D. T., Mosello, R.,
Rogora, M., Rzychon, D., Vesely, J., Wieting, J., Wilander, A., and
Worsztynowicz, A.: Regional scale evidence for improvements in surface water
chemistry 1990--2001, Environ. Pollut., 137, 165--176, 2005.

\bibitem{}
Spencer, R. G. M., Pellerin, B. A., Bergamaschi, B. A., Downing, B. D.,
Kraus, T. E. C., Smart, D. R., Dahgren, R. A., and Hernes, P. J.: Diurnal
variability in riverine dissolved organic matter composition determined by in
situ optical measurement in the San Joaquin River (California, USA), Hydrol.
Process., 21, 3181--3189, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hyp.6887}{doi:10.1002/hyp.6887}, 2007.

\bibitem{}
Stedmon, C. A., Markager, S., and Bro, R.: Tracing dissolved organic matter
in aquatic environments using a new approach to fluorescence spectroscopy,
Mar. Chem., 82, 239--254, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0304-4203(03)00072-0}{doi:10.1016/S0304-4203(03)00072-0}, 2003.

\bibitem{}
Walling, D. E. and Webb, B. W.: Estimating the discharge of contaminants to
coastal waters by rivers: Some cautionary comments, Mar. Pollut. Bull., 16,
488--492, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0025-326X(85)90382-0}{doi:10.1016/0025-326X(85)90382-0}, 1985.

\bibitem{}
Wickham, H.: The split-apply-combine strategy for data analysis, J. Stat.
Softw., 40, 1--29, 2011.

\bibitem{}
Worrall, F., Gibson, H. S., and Burt, T. P.: Production vs. solubility in
controlling runoff of DOC from peat soils -- The use of an event analysis, J.
Hydrol., 358, 84--95, \href{http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2008.05.037}{doi:10.1016/j.jhydrol.2008.05.037}, 2008.

\end{thebibliography}


\end{document}
