=head1 NAME

mod_perl Tutorials and Presentations

=head1 Description

Over the years, mod_perl talks have been held at several conferences
about Perl, Apache or Open Source. Many of those giving talks put some
information online, and you can learn a lot from that.

If you know of any other mod_perl tutorials and presentations not
listed on this page please let us know at the
L<users|maillist::modperl> mailing list.

=head1 Tutorials and Presentations

=over

=item *

Geoffrey Young gives several wonderful tutorials every year, if you
haven't been to his talks you definitely should. He has put his
materials online at: http://www.modperlcookbook.org/~geoff/slides/

=item *

I<Industrial Strength Publishing>, by Ian Callen, Salon.com.
http://www.salonmag.com/contact/staff/idk/print.html. Talk held at the
O'Reilly Open Source Software Convention in Monterery, California on
07/20/2000.

=item *

I<Introduction to mod_perl> by Nathan Torkington.
http://prometheus.frii.com/~gnat/mod_perl/ (PPT and PDF formats).

=item *

Stas Bekman has put all his talks online: http://stason.org/talks/

=item *

I<Real World Performance Tuning for mod_perl> by Ask Bj√∏rn Hansen.
http://develooper.com/modperl/  (held at The Perl Conference 5, San
Diego, July 2001).

=item *

Eric Cholet has a collection of talks he has given at
http://www.logilune.com/eric/

=item *

Thomas Klausner gave a tutorial titled "Web Application Development
using mod_perl and CPAN" at the German Perl Workshop 2003.

The slides (in German) are available from here:
http://domm.zsi.at/talks/modperl_pws2003/

=item *

Mike Fletcher has two introductory talks on mod_perl:
http://phydeaux.org/perl/yapc/ and
http://phydeaux.org/perl/mptalk/ .

=item *

Michael Parker's 1998 talk on Performance Tuning:
http://www.perl.org/oscon/1998/Perl_and_Apache/Performance%20Tuning/


=item *

I<Apache, mod_perl and Embperl> by Malcolmn Beattie.
http://web.archive.org/web/20010605114950/http://users.ox.ac.uk/~mbeattie/oxlug-oct99/. Held
at OxLUG, 3 October 1999.

=item *

Enrico Sorcinelli gave the talk I<20 things you may not know about
mod_perl> at the 2nd Italian Perl Workshop on June 2005:
http://www.perl.it/documenti/talks/ipw/2005/bepi/mod_perl_20_things-eng/img0.html

=back

 META: Move this to Conferences part if we make one. Would be nice to be
 able to have a standard presentation format to put them all online.

=cut

